(laughs)
(laughs) All right.
Uh, welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
Uh, you're the last, uh-
(laughs) ... government agency that we've got in today, so congratulations on
that.
(laughs)
Everyone's-
Congratulations to you.
... highly rumpled.
If we had have got you in first, we would have finished a lot earlier.
(laughs)
So, um, w- we'll leave it in your hands.
I guess, we'll look for, um, opening remarks and, and a bit of
a summary of
the year's performance and, and, um, then the committee will have
questions. So-
Great.
... away you go.
Tēnā koutou katoa. My name's, um, Alex Skinner.
I'm, uh, chair of QV. Recently took over from Gregory Forte in,
June. Um, I'm supported by Jacqui Barker, our
CEO, by David Nagel, our chief commercial
officer, and hiding in the background as all good accountants do,
Garry Oakes, our CFO.
(laughs)
Um, just, uh, I thought I might just touch on a little bit about
QV, a little bit about the 25 year results and some of the
things we're focusing on. I won't take longer than five minutes. Is that all right?
Away you go.
Thank you, guys.
So, we play a vital role in the New Zealand property system, as I'm sure
you well know. We provide trusted property valuations and intelligence
that underpin fair and transparent local government funding, bank
risk assessments and informed decision-making to individuals, to businesses
and to the Crown government agencies.
We're custodians of 2.4 million properties, that's the rates
roll, $3 trillion worth in value. We have 250
staff and we operate in New Zealand and
Australia. Our results for '25,
um, are fantastic, and I do want to
acknowledge, um, the hard work of Jacqui and the whole of the QV team
for, for the results. We had revenue of, uh, just over 40
million. About 70% of that is from ratings, rating, uh,
revaluations. We had EV- EBITDA of 5.1 million,
significant increase on budget. We had net profit of 2.2
million. We increased the, the gross margin.
We paid special dividends to the government of $5 million.
Uh, include... And on top of that, we had our ordinary dev- dividend of
770,000. On the non-financial performance
measures, uh, net promot- promoter score of plus 42
for staff,
plus 42 for customers, which included
plus 71 for our council customers, which when you've got
a minus 100 to 100 rating, you know, all three of those are just
astounding.
Areas we focused on, uh, reputation and trust.
We've had independent research on a regular basis, and we're number one for
the most trusted property brand, the most accurate property
valuations, and the most accurate online-
Awesome. ... property estimates. Our brand awareness sits at
78%. Our brand trust is 73%, and we've had our most
successful year for access to our website.
On the people and capability side, uh, we invested this year in
a QA team. Um, so this is a, a team of highly skilled,
experienced valuers that, that have gone in and,
um, done independent reviews of rating valuations before they get
submitted to councils. And that's been a huge, um, huge
success. The Valuer-General often talks about it.
Uh, we run the largest property graduation
program, and we had 11 graduates, um, uh,
become registered valuers this year.
And we've been recognized by the industry body with honors t- uh, recently,
five out of eight awards, winning the Supreme Award and the Future Leaders Award.
Technology and innovation, uh, is obviously central to our strategy.
We are a data company. Uh, we value...
Uh, we've focused on the speed, accuracy, real-time insights,
productivity of how we use that data to, to inform-
Yeah.
... valuations, um, but with a measured approach when it comes to
AI. Um, our focus is to protect and enhance our
revenues and deliver more to our
customers. Going forward, we do have some
headwinds. Uh, the recovery of the property
market is likely to be, um... continue to be slow.
That impacts our ability to generate revenues through
valuations. Um, we've had a challenging situation with New
South Wales Government, where they've in-housed a significant
component of, um, the valuations, um, and
put the rest out to tender. So we are, um, waiting on the
outcome of that, and we've tendered for, for the ones that we feel that we're best
placed to, to win. Um, and we need
to keep pace with technology.
So we're focusing, uh, going forward, on strengthening our prof-
profitability and margins, um, using operational
efficiency, getting things done quicker, embedding our
technology, um, investment that we're making,
um, and delivering what the customer wants and needs more of
that. And we feel we're fully aligned with the government's expectations around
performance, accountability, contributing for the greater good of the
public. So welcome to open up to
questions for myself or any of the team.
Thank you for that. Uh, we'll go straight to you, Damian.
Uh, sure. Well, thank you very much-
Okay.
... and, and congratulations on, um, you know, what is a strong
performance. Um, I guess you have a...
you have a near monopoly, I, I guess, role-
Mm-hmm.
... in, across our property market and, and that's, you know, to be
congratulated. I guess that's why the taxpayer, um, still owns you.
But, um, I guess, have you been asked to put
forward a case for privatization of your entity?
No.
So the Deputy Prime Minister has indicated that he thinks that
it's odd that we have
a public valuation company under the taxpayer.
Have you had any indication that that is what might happen to
you? Other than what we read in the papers?
Would you consider that your given dividend that you paid the
taxpayer and your performance is, as you say, fantastic, um,
you'd be ripe for some kind of sell off?
I wouldn't like to make a judgment on that.
I think that's a shareholder choice, but I suppose what I would
say is that we play a very integral
role in the valuation, um, sector and
particularly for, uh, the local governments
where, um, we determine basically their main source of
income.
So Mr. Tuman, thank- thank you. I mean-
Yeah.
... you- you say that, you know, things are a little slow and they could be given
the recovery of the property market is...
Um, and- and I'm trying to connect that property market
and your income given that you- you have a process evaluation
regardless of whether people are buying or selling.
I guess, what percentage of your income comes from the transfer
of properties versus the standard, uh, valuation
process that you run through councils?
So at a revenue line off the top of my head, I think about 70% is from
the ratings work.
Right.
And the rest is through professional services to banks, to insurance
companies and to
(laughs)
And a lot of that se- so... I mean, I guess, the recovery of the property market
might make a marginal difference, but not at the core of it.
Mm-hmm.
Correct.
Okay.
Uh, thought you would carry on ............................
Yeah. Look, I- I don't wanna- don't wanna dominate.
Can I, can I just, um, uh-
(laughs)
(laughs) ... can I just, just challenge you on... Uh, not for too long.
Um,
can I, can I... Do you really believe this is true that property is New Zealand
ATO's most valuable physical asset?
Don't you think people might be?
(laughs)
Might come third after people and
land.
(laughs)
Uh, I suppose-
But it's- it's your statement.
Yeah. In our world, um, we're focused
No, I appreciate it, but I-
...
property. You know, there are government agencies so I guess- I guess it's- it's something
that, uh... And- and I think that we, um, as
governments have been, um, mindful of the
property fixation-
Yes.
... which- which may or may not lead to low levels of productivity, which- which
kind of leads me on to the one of the valuation process itself.
And I was surprised that you had...
It was a relatively low level of...
Well, was it customer satisfaction or...
About 65% or- or a positive indicator.
I think you'll- you'll probably have to work in front of me on this and, um,
would that just-
Net promoter score.
Net promoter.
Net... Yes. Net promoters. Would that just be because property
values have been a little low and they're blaming you at the moment?
Well, but I don't think that's... Because did it...
I think it dropped slightly from last year, but-
Yeah. Well, but-
But net promoter score of plus 65 is good in anyone's books.
Net-
I mean that's right at the top end
because it could be minus 20.
I- I- I guess the issue is the one of it, of it being connected in your...
The- the- the perception of your performance or your value
being connected directly to property values, which is not what
it should be.
No, I think the net promoter score is, um, from our
customers, so for the services that we provide to our
customers. So, um, those are long-term
contracts, a lot of them, um, some of them are shorter term
contracts, all sorts of different kinds of work that we undertake.
So when we do a net promoter score for our
customers, um, it's from that basis that we are doing it from.
One last one. Thank you. I mean, uh, y- you provide valuations to
councils and if those valuations have declined, often councils are a little bit
agitated by that. Um, is- is that played
into that reduction of net?
Well, I'll just go back to the plus 71 that we got, the net promoter
score for councils-
Councils.
... our key customers. So-
Also, the, um, trust score from our councils is 92% trust
in-
Oh, wow.
... um, in our site, which is a very high score as well.
One of the reasons why sometimes we get a bit of a fluctuation in the net
promoter score is because the scores are actually quite high.
So it's very hard to keep a high score than it is to go from a low score
and to go up to a high score. So some of it is just around the edges of
keeping a- a pretty high score. Yeah.
Good defense.
(laughs)
Steve?
I'll come at it from a slightly different angle from Damian, but, um,
what- what is the value to the New Zealand public of
keeping QV in public
ownership?
So I would, um... There's a number of things that
are... I- I sort of answer it very similar to- to how
with, um, Damian as well, is the
integrity of a key source of
income that councils use, which is the
rating, rating values-
Yes.
... having, um, quality-
Exactly.
... timely, accurate data that's needed
to undertake their process. Um,
there is, uh, access to,
um, experts in the field that can undertake the work.
But I, yeah, I hear you, that could be on a commercial basis as well, is on a
commercial basis and there is a commercial
return that we pay back to the government
as, uh, end result. Would you add anything?
Um, the other thing that I would say is that in our market for
rating valuations, which is where we see our core strength,
um, there are only two significant providers here.
Um, and one is not a New Zealand company-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and we are. Uh, and we have the
majority of the work by far. We have 87%,
um, of the work.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and so it's been contestable for 25
years-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and there's been very few other competitors
come in over that time. Um, ones who have come in,
have not lasted and left.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and so I think that-... the
significance of the work that we do from a rating
valuation perspective to support the councils, to ensure that they can
then, um, do what they need to do is really, really
important that we have stable, long-term
people who can deliver that. Um, and I think that the
independence of us is second to none
in terms of, you know, all other providers-
Yeah.
... for valuation services.
Can I just supplement? Do you think the extent of that, uh, trust
that you have, um, is in part due to the fact you're
being around for so long and you're publicly owned?
We believe that that is part of our value proposition, yes.
Yeah?
And the people keep coming back to you guys because you're seen as
the, the trusted authority in the
market?
Correct. Yeah.
Thank you.
Rachel, you had a sup?
I've got a sup, which links a little bit with Steve but mostly to Damien's
line of questioning, which is actually around, I guess your identification of
customers because-
Mm-hmm.
... obviously there's the local government sector.
Do you also test out with property owners as well,
your, your, you know? Because I think...
and whether you see them as the customers when they're doing, when you're doing
the, not the, uh, individual, um,
valuations that might come through a, you know, a change of home ownership, uh,
but when you're doing the wholesale assessment for the purposes of
rating valuation.
You know, do you measure customer satisfaction with the, at the homeowner level
or just at the council level?
That's a trick question. We might have to trick someone. Yeah, no.
Yeah, so, um, we don't, so that's, we talk about our
customer's customer.
Yes.
Yes. (laughs) Uh, ratepayers and, and so on.
Um, so we don't actually survey,
do a survey per se for them. However, we do do
independent research-
Mm-hmm.
... for, um, our brand and our independence and
trust and, um, how people see, um, how
accurate our valuations are and that sort of thing, which is what, um, Alex talked
about, um, in the statement, um, opening,
uh, that last year we were ranked number one
property firm in New Zealand and for accuracy,
for automated valuations and for other valuations as well.
So number one, and that was against some pretty fierce
competition as well. So, um, so there is some research that we
do independently that isn't directly to
the ratepayer but they are part of the, um,
the people who do get surveyed.
Well, because they're impacted, right?
So-
Yes.
Yes. So, so, and, and having... Uh, it's one of the things you see as a local MP, you'll
see people who are grumpy that their, their valuation is lower than they think it
should be and then in the opposite direction, they think-
(clears throat)
... um, that it's too, too high. So yeah, and obviously, like have you had an
change in the number of, um, challenges you've had and, um,
requests for review? Like is that reasonably consistent in terms of the
percentage? Yeah.
Uh, that's tracked down quite, uh, markedly over the past-
Yeah.
... three or four years.
Um, and I'm not sure whether that's, um, whether COVID has had something to do with
that, but I would have, um... Uh, I think it's primarily because
people are more involved in the rating valuation process.
They're more educated-
Mm-hmm.
... around, um, understanding what a rating, rating valuation,
um, is-
The means, yeah.
... and how it's being can, being completed.
Um,
uh, five years ago we were averaging around about, um, 2% objection rates.
Mm-hmm.
This year we're tracking at about 1%.
It could be partly due to the market being very, uh, very stable at the moment,
very stagnant.
Yeah.
But I'd also add if, if, if ratepayers have problems with
their rates-
(laughs) Yes.
... the councils would know about it, in which case the councils would be
coming to us. So, so there is a-
I'd say that- ... filter through.
(clears throat) And I think the other part of that around the objection rate, which
is when people contest-
Mm-hmm. ... the valuations that we, um, that we do, um,
that's an opportunity for us to talk to the homeowners and
ratepayers of those properties and actually explain about the valuations
and how they're done and why they are whatever that, what, what the levels are.
So it gives us a one-to-one opportunity to do that.
Mm-hmm.
So that's why that part of the process is really important to the overall
system and process, yeah.
And so one last thing. I was just...
Uh, this is interesting because, you know, you get people who want a higher
valuation and people who want a lower valuation-
Yes. (laughs)
... for different, depending on where they are, right?
Do you find there's a
With a buyer or seller.
Exactly.
Buy or sell.
Or, or, or just on how much rates they want to pay, you know, where they are in the
cycle of-
Got a lot
more rates. ... ownership of the property.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Just want to get-
And so do you find there tends to be a trend around which, you know, which
direction people wanted to go-
(laughs)
... if they look at the numbers?
Um- Locations. Yeah, certainly. There's, um, there, there's those, those two sides
of the fence. So if you run, you, you, you bet your boots, if that, someone's
objected to the evaluation and they want it higher, it's-
Yeah.
... um, chances are it's gonna go on the market over the next six months.
And so people make a decision what they're going to do over the next three-year
period before the next revaluation cycle-
Yes,
yes, yes. Yeah. ... I think, and they might want to object to this valuation.
Yeah.
Um, in saying that, others, um, are, um, they're, they're aware that they're bags.
So probably looking at the valuations as well.
They know they've spent some money on their new kitchen and new bathroom-
And they want to-
... that didn't require a building consent. They want it reflected just in case.
So-
Yeah.
Um, and of course there's other, um, rating values aren't just used for
levying rates. They've been used historically for, um, uh, for,
for buyout, um, schemes, et cetera.
Yeah.
Um, um, post-earthquakes or floods, et cetera.
So there's other reasons why people might want their rating evaluations
higher. So-
You, you, look-
Sup?
Sup, sup, sup.
Yeah?
Look, taking on the process, and I, I just saw some, uh, photos from Papamoa
Beach the other day.
(laughs)
Um, and, and, you know, I mean, quite horrifying.
So-
Yeah.
... I guess the question is, these are assets that would be, uh, valued in the
millions of dollars. At what point-...
does the asset value slump? So, I mean, if I was owning a house and
I say, "Well, the value's going down.
I'm gonna pay
... I'm not gonna pay my rates 'cause my, you know, value's up." So the qu- couple
of questions to you. At what point do insurance companies come to you
or do you go to them and say, "The risk has changed
dramatically, um,
do we need to, or should we, or we are going to revalue." What's
the process there? Because-
Good question. ... we are in a very rapidly changing environment.
So there's, there's a section of the legislation that provides for extraordinary
events. So if it's been a, half the section's gone because there's been a storm
and it's a, a coastal property, the land's gone, then that,
that would then be revalued, um, upon a coun- a council
request. Um, we don't work directly with insurance companies.
We do work with... We worked a lot of work with the National, uh, Natural Hazards
Commission. Um, so we do indirectly work with insurance companies.
But that's not to, uh, foretell what property values might do in
the event of a storm. But potentially after a storm, we'll, we'll
get more involved there.
Thank you. 'Cause I, it is a process.
I mean, you, but, you know, we love the coastal properties.
And so, you know, if, if it's 50 meters out,
then you place a value on a property.
If it's 30 meters out, or 10 meters-
Yeah.
... do you take those factors into account or does the Valuation
Act allow you to take those factors into account?
Yeah, of course it does. But at the end of the day-
Mm-hmm.
... we're, um, driven by the market.
So if the market is still paying X dollars for that property-
Mm-hmm.
... that is, um, that is, uh,
(clears throat)
... in peril-
(coughs)
... then that's what it's worth. Uh, a- a- and can I just add too, just for
clarity-
Mm-hmm.
... that, um, currently there's not that many properties in New Zealand that cannot
get insurance because of, um, because of danger.
And when that happens, um, if you can't get insurance you can't get a
mortgage. If you can't get a mortgage, then your pool of potential buyers
has reduced significantly and that is gonna have a direct impact on your
property value.
C- can I... Yes. And, and I'll leave it to you.
I mean,
as long as the councils are putting those risks on the limb-
Yep.
... and people are very aware, I, I, I think every one of...
Well, maybe you don't because you don't, you know, it makes no sense 'cause I know
of real estate agents who simply don't tell the bloody truth
when they come-
(laughs)
... when they come-
Really? When they come to selling properties-
Don't tell you, Matt. (laughs)
... where l- where local knowledge would say-
(clears throat)
... "You know, it's, it's not worth it." I mean, I, look, I, it's not
your fault. I'm just wondering how we walk through this dilemma regardless to
gov... Sorry.
No, no, no, you're fine. I just, I just wanted to bounce off something you just
said, which was, um, about the market.
But doesn't, don't your valuations help inform the market?
So are you, is this not a cyclical situation whereby that people will
look at what the value
like the QV is before making an offer.
It's part of the consideration for
how a seller may, um,
you know, how they might pitch the property in terms of where they'll place it.
But also the, the bid that a buyer would put on it.
I, I think all valuation, all valuers will impact, uh, on a, a
potential sale price if they provide advice.
Um, for rating valuations, we don't set the market, we follow the market.
Right.
So we need to have evidence of, um, of an outcome.
Yeah.
And we'll look at properties that have sold over the three-year period and make a
call on where the market's going.
Or-
That could be due to a weather event.
It-
Yeah.
... could be due to a zoning change.
It could just do, be due to a s- a change in sentiment for that type of
property.
And sorry, one... This is fascinating actually.
(laughs)
This is the sort of thing local MPs should get briefings on actually.
Sorry. (laughs) Just one more stuff.
What, what about a situation where the weather event was li- quite recent
and so the market hadn't had an opportunity to actually fully respond before you
re-evaluation? Like, is that something that gets, gets taken into
consideration?
Yes. And this was, um, a, a, an issue last time we were here, actually just
after, um, Gabriel.
Yeah.
Um, and, um, because of the enormous,
um, uncertainty around, um, the impacts of the storm in
terms of, um, because the damage was still being assessed, uh, there was a rating,
uh, uh, a revaluation scheduled for Hastings District at the
time.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Um, so damage was done, but the, um, the assessment date, the
valu- the ASAT valuation date was at a time prior to the
storm. And so, uh, the, uh, the regulators at, um,
at LINZ, the office of the Valuer-General made a determination that
these valuations would be done ignoring the outcomes of the storm.
Yeah. Okay.
Mr. Chair?
Uh, is that a sup?
Yeah, sup.
Okay.
So just to d- to dig into this, like, you, in
your,
in your report you acknowledge the increasing frequency of
extreme weather events.
They will continue to affect properties and property values across many parts of
the country. We have been working to better understand these impacts as they relate
to all property types and locations so we can more
effectively support New Zealanders and the wider property
ecosystem. What does that actually mean if
you're not taking into account localized risks
to a given property? In terms of those extreme weather events, you're
only taking into account how the market is
responding to that perceived risk.
The, the how the market is responding is carried in the valuations, the actual
capital value that we ascribe and the land value that we ascribed, and the value of
the improvements. However, there is a whole, uh, bundle of
supporting information that informs buyers.
Part of that is, uh, is, is hazard information that's sitting on the LIM reports.
LIM. Yeah.
Now that the LIGOA's, um, in the process of being changed, I'm not sure if that's
passed yet.
Yeah.
So LIGOA has been amended so that LIM reports have to
include, uh, information around natural hazards.
Yeah.
So buyers are informed if they do their due diligence.
Um, valuers, um, that are making those assessments then have that same
information that we get from the councils, from the regional councils, from, um,
EarthScience, so that we can make those determinations as well.
When we see this property over here's been impacted by, um, by a
flood and it's sold at this level-This property over
here, um, hasn't sold, um, but it's be- also been impacted by
a, a, by a flood, by some flood damage and there's
limitations on what you can do with it.
So, we can use that information for one transaction and overlay onto another.
So, we do build that, um, risk into the valuation-
Right.
... even though it hasn't sold.
Y- y- you build the rest in the evaluation.
Does that manifest in, in you lowering the value of something
where you have evaluate- you have seen through the lens, through your understanding
of what's happened in terms of recent extreme weather events, that
this property is potentially overvalued in terms
of previous sale prices or, you know, how it relates to properties
around it, and you therefore will intentionally
lower the value of it?
Absolutely. If we have-
You are doing that?
... if we have evidence that supports that-
Yeah.
... of other transactions that have sold in similar situations, we will overlay
that evidence onto another location that hasn't had, had the sales
evidence-
Yeah.
... and we'll make that determination.
Okay. Thank you.
Just to sup on that, do you think councils should be more proactive in, in
identifying the areas where they believe,
um, there's higher risk from whether it's coastal
erosion, inundation, those
various climatic factors that, um, up 'til now
have been, in some council areas have been hard to judge
for particularly those that are coming from outside the area who, who are
new to it?
Um, I, I do have empathy for the councils because there's a lot of conflicting
information out there, a lot of conflicting science.
And where councils have been proactive, uh, with, um, putting,
placing, uh, um, uh, information on their little reports in the
past, they've, um, they've been challenged because of course that might have an
impact on pro- on their property value.
So, there's been lobby groups have challenged them, taken them to court.
I think that's the reason why the, um, the changes to the WUMA
have, um-
Mm-hmm.
... have, uh, legislated that. So, there's now a requirement for councils to do
this and they're protected from, um, from, uh, uh, court
action against them.
Okay. It's up to Mike and then to Damian.
Yeah. And I just, just, I guess, further to that and we've probably seen that with
the RCP 8.5 scenario being used for modeling-
Yeah.
... and then it was ruled out. And so people were making a whole lot of assumptions
based on that. And they've gone, "Oh, well actually that's not accurate." We did
see a lot of that challenge. And then it's been moved down a,
moved down a, a, a version like this and it's not quite as bad as
what it was made out to be.
Yeah. Yeah, and of course, um, you know, with the conversations around the, um,
the, uh, national adaptation, um, framework, uh, I think all,
what we're trying to, what the, what that is trying to do is to keep
the, um, the memory at front of mind rather than having it drift along the
back.
Yeah. ?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Look, it re- it really was run ar- around the s- you know, the scientific
kind of-
Mm-hmm. ... debate, um, whether that's the case or, or whether it's
actually council's different interpretation of the same science.
I think there is a bit of a difference there.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and, and so, I mean, y- you're saying as though
some of the science is debatable or the interpretation of the
science?
No, the interpretation of the s- Oh, oh, well, um, it's, uh,
n- not in terms of, uh, whether there's climate change or not.
I was meaning more around the engineering, um, of, uh-
Of course. ... protecting properties and, um, and what type of,
uh, what level of risk occurs in one location ver- versus another because these
things tend to be over a, if it's, um, if it's rising sea
levels, it'll be over a section of coastline.
Yeah, yeah.
And yet, um, some, some prope- some properties may not
necessarily be eroding at the same level as, as other properties in that
same coastline.
So more-
Yeah.
... so it's more a debate around the risk assessment rather than the science?
Yes, exactly.
I mean, I think, yeah.
Okay. I accept
that.
Yeah.
The, yep, yeah. Look, c- look, thank you.
Can I just go back to the first point I was raising and, and the one of, of and
you've given assurance that you've not been asked to do any work around
privatization, but-
Still got your private, yeah.
... the Minister of Local Government said to a group of EU potential
investors,
"Please come and invest in our country.
We want to look at, uh, areas of investment where there is monopolistic
opportunities." You would be one of the perfect examples-
Yeah.
... of somewhat monopolistic, um, oversight into a
market.
Why are you trying to flog them off, Damian?
Well, is, is, is w- would you agree that that, I mean, you're dominant in the
market.
We're dominant in the market-
You don't just stop there.
... but yeah. I mean, decisions around ownership are not decisions for
us.
Right.
And I suppose I'm reluctant to give any-
Sorry, sorry to labor it-
Yeah. ... but I gue- I guess it is really important given that you are such a critical
component, uh, as, as you say, of the-
Yeah. Actually-
... of our whole property and valuation and security of New Zealanders'
lives, I guess, that, um, but the alternative
to you is a foreign-owned company
and if you were to be sold, then, then I guess the security
and, and objectivity of, of property valuation could be
in the hands of the private market.
What you're saying is exactly the fa- the, the facts.
If it was sold, it would be the private market, certainly.
Mm-hmm.
I agree with that, yes.
Very good. Look, we've come to the end, just like that.
How about that?
Just like that.
(laughing)
Oh
my God.
(overlapped talking)
Um, just, I was just having a look through, um, your department- Opposition, we'll
be helping you out,
Mike.
I don't
... replacement year to target of, um-
Yeah.
... 168 and you're down at 80%. And then on looking back through the
last three years to, uh, you know, capital, uh,
budgeted capital expenditure versus actual and there's an accumulation there of
about four point, 4.2 million. Is,
um, can you just talk us through that and has some of that, you know,
deferred maintenance or capital replacement fed
into this year's profit? Um, but is that capital
replacement still just sitting there in the background?
So, there-
And gonna be, have to be addressed at some point in time? What is that?
So, the capital replacement all relates to systems.
Yep.
Um, is, is IT infrastructure-
... which we, um, do the majority in-house.
Um, we had a legacy system that we are
transferring everything across from and we are pretty much
complete on that now.
Just about.
Yep.
Um, that was fundamental that we, we got that piece of work done.
Um, we anticipated to, um,
start
looking into the benefits of using new technology
such as AI-
Yep.
... to, um, do more with less, more effective,
more quickly. Um, our first look at that
using an outside provider was cost
prohibitive, so what, we've actually got it on the board's table that, to
how do we do it? When do we do it? It doesn't mean that we
can't do the work we're doing now.
Yep.
Um, it just means that we're sort of planning it appropriately
to, to be ef- as effective and as efficient as possible.
So, the deferment's not impacting on your efficiency?
No, no. Uh, no. It w- we will be more efficient once it's
in-
Yeah.
... incurred, but we're not inefficient because it hasn't been incurred.
If that's your question.
Yep.
There you go. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
(laughs) Sure. All right. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Um-
Thank
you. Thanks for your time. We appreciate it. Thanks.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.